Add exercises pg 2 (#3)
ASPP-pandas-tutorials/pandas_from_numpy: 0_2_pandas_dataframes_attributes_methods.Rmd

# import libraries
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd

# a hint for and exercise

> from hint import hint

Author: Resolving after in person discussion.

# Select columns by direct indexing, then describe.
df[cols].describe()
```
::: {exercise-start}
:label: by-any-means
:class: dropdown
:::

Can you think of what code you need to write to create a Series that contains the just the means of the `Human Development Index`, `Fertility Rate` and `Population` variables? For good measure, lets also require that the `name` attribute is set to `mean`. The output should look like this:

```
Human Development Index      0.789333
Fertility Rate               1.773867
Population                 236.719867
Name: mean, dtype: float64
```

Try to do this in as few lines of code as possible, using the methods shown on this page...

```{python}
# your code here
```

::: {exercise-end}
:::

::: {solution-start} by-any-means
:class: dropdown
:::

> The output of the `.describe()` method is itself a Dataframe, and the `index` of this Dataframe contains a row called `mean`, which, shockingly, contains the means. As a result, you can use `.loc` indexing to retrieve just the means from the output of `.describe()`:

Reviewer: Maybe a hint here about `.describe` having the useful property that, by default, it drops non-numeric variables.

```{python}
# effective but ugly
import numpy.random as npr
npr.permutation(df)
```

Can you think of a way to perform this operation using only the Pandas methods we have seen so far on this page? In the cell below, you should write code which will:

- randomize the order of the *rows* in the Dataframe. The data in each row should be the same as before shuffling (e.g. the data for Russia should still be the data for Russia etc.)

- ensure that no rows are removed or duplicated, just shuffled

Try to find the solution in the cell below. Use as few lines of code as possible:

```{python}
# your solution here
```

::: {exercise-end}
:::

::: {solution-start} random-samples
:class: dropdown
:::

The solution is to take a `.sample()` which is the same *size as the number of rows in the original dataframe*. We can do this easily by using `n = len(df)` as in the input for `df.sample()`:

```{python}
# a trick to shuffle the rows
df.sample(n = len(df))
```

> Or, with greater grace, we can use `frac = 1`, to mean "take a random sample of 100% of the rows", effectively permuting them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, with greater grace, we can use `frac=1`, to mean "take a random sample of 100% of the rows", effectively permuting them:
```

```{python}
# a clean, efficient way to permute the rows
df.sample(frac=1)
```

If you look at the `index` of either Dataframe in the above ceels, you'll notice that the rows are now in a random order.

Because the sample is a random selection of the rows - and the default setting of `.sample()` is to sample *without replacement*  - using both `.sample(len(df))` and `df.sample(frac=1)` has the effect of randomizing the row order. All the original rows remaining in the sample, and there is no duplication of any rows.

This method is often used on individual columns to (most likely) remove any statistical relationships between the data in that column and other columns. For instance, for [permutation testing](https://matthew-brett.github.io/cfd2020/permutation/permutation_and_t_test.html).

::: {solution-end}
:::

::: {exercise-start}
:label: more-random
:class: dropdown
:::

> We mentioned above that the default behaviour of the `.sample()` method is to sample *without replacement*. We also mentioned that you can use the `replace =` argument to sample *with* replacement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We mentioned above that the default behaviour of the `.sample()` method is to sample *without replacement*. We also mentioned that you can use the `replace=` argument to sample *with* replacement.
```

To use a classic "drawing marbles from a bag" analogy, this means that when we randomly select a marble, we place it *back* in the bag (after recording it's identity/colour etc) before we randomly draw the next marble. This means the same marble can appear twice in the final sample. 

As mentioned above, if we draw a sample of rows *with replacement* from our Dataframe, then individual rows can appear more than once in the resultant sample. If we draw a sample with replacement which is *larger* than the original data, it will certainly contain duplicate rows:

```{python}
# a sample with replacement
df.sample(len(df) + 10, 
          replace=True) 
```

> Quickly scan the `index` for duplicates, to see that this it definitely contains duplicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quickly scan the `index` for duplicates, to see that it contains duplicates (as it must, in order to generate a sample of this size).
```

You task now is the following:

- take a random sample *with replacement* of all the rows in the Dataframe (e.g. your sample should have the *same number of rows* as the original Dataframe)

- use an appropriate method to calculate the means of `Human Development Index`, `Fertility Rate` and `Population`, from your random sample

> - using appropriate Pandas methods and indexing operations, calculate the *difference* between the means of `Human Development Index`, `Fertility Rate` and `Population` in your sample vs the means for the same variables in the original data

Reviewer: My overwhelming distress at seeing the word "appropriate":

```suggestion
- using Pandas methods and indexing operations, calculate the *difference* between the means of `Human Development Index`, `Fertility Rate` and `Population` in your sample vs the means for the same variables in the original data
```

- store your result in a Pandas Series (note: depending what methods you use, your result may automatically be stored in a Pandas Series)

> The result should look something like this (though your differences with almost certainly be different to the ones shown below):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result should look something like this (though your differences will differ from the ones shown below, because of the randomness inherent in your sampling):
```

```

Try to do this in as few lines of code as possible.

```{python}
# your code here
```

::: {exercise-end}
:::

::: {solution-start} more-random
:class: dropdown
:::

There are several ways you can achieve this, but one way of doing it in a single line of code is to *chain Pandas methods together*.

The left hand side of the subtraction operation in the cell below uses the `.describe()` method and `.loc` indexing to calculate the means of the original data.

The right hand side of the subtraction draws a sample (the same size as the number of rows in `df`) using `.sample()` with `replace=True`. It then uses `.describe()` to calculate the means of the numeric variables *in this random sample*, and then `.loc` to select just those means (as opposed to including the other information that `.describe()` reports, like standard deviations etc).

The result of this subtraction shows us the difference between the original means and the means of our *resample* (e.g. our random sample, drawn with replacement):

```{python}
# show the difference in the means (original data vs resample)
df.describe().loc['mean'] - df.sample(len(df), replace=True).describe().loc['mean']
```

> You can also perform the same process, less efficiently, spread over multiple lines of code. The way shown below is not the only possible way - perhaps you used the `.mean()` method individually on each column, for instance, and then manually constructed a `Series` to store the results (even less efficient!) :

Reviewer: Or `df.mean()` after dropping the string column?

Author: ```suggestion
You can also perform the same process, less efficiently, spread over multiple lines of code. The way shown below is not the only possible way - perhaps you used the `.mean()` method individually on each column, for instance, and then manually constructed a `Series` to store the results (even less efficient!) . Alternatively, you might have used `.drop()` to remove non-numeric columns, and then used `.mean()` in parallel on the numeric columns, another valid approach:
```

> ... but for a larger dataset we could find them using [Boolean filtering - a topic we will come to in a later page](0_5_filtering_data_with_pandas.Rmd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... but for a larger dataset we could find them using [Boolean filtering ](0_5_filtering_data_with_pandas).
```

Awaiting reorganization.

::: {exercise-start}
:label: getting-barred
:class: dropdown
:::

> If you use `.plot(kind = "bar")` you will generate a bar plot (that is, a chart with bars representing counts for different categories).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use `.plot(kind="bar")` you will generate a bar plot (that is, a chart with bars representing counts for different categories).
```

> Your task is to use indexing methods of your choice, along with **only** the Pandas methods shown on this page, to create a bar plot which has:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your task is to use indexing methods of your choice, restricting yourself to the Pandas methods shown on this page, to create a bar plot which has:
```

* the name of each country on the x-axis

...and...

* bars which show the population of the country on the y-axis. The bars should be ordered from highest population (left hand side of the graph) to lowest population (right hand side of the graph).

*Unless you enjoy cheating, do not use other plotting libraries!*. Your final result should look like this:

![](images/bar_example.png)

> Try to create the plot using as few lines of code as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As ever, use as few lines as you can, while but keep your code readable.
```

```{python}
# your code below
```

::: {exercise-end}
:::

::: {solution-start} getting-barred
:class: dropdown
:::

It is possible to create this plot in one line of code, again, by *chaining* Pandas methods together. First, we use direct indexing with the column names to select just those variables. 

> Then we use `sort_values()` using the `by = 'Population'` and `ascending = False` arguments to ensure that the population counts are sorted in descending order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we use `sort_values()` using the `by='Population'` and `ascending=False` arguments to ensure that the population counts are sorted in descending order.
```

We then chain `.plot(kind='bar')` on the end, and we get the desired plot:

```{python}
# solution
df[['Country Name', 'Population']].sort_values(by='Population', ascending=False).plot(kind='bar')
```

> *Food for thought*: what will happen if you reverse the order of `Country Name` and `Population` in the direct indexing operation? Perhaps the order is telling `.plot()` which variable to put on the x-axis and which on the y-axis?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Food for thought*: what will happen if you reverse the order of `Country Name` and `Population` in the direct indexing operation? Do you think this will change the x-axis and and y-axis variables on the `.plot()`?
```

Have a think about what you think will happen; you can check by uncommenting the code below to see if you were correct:

```{python}
# df[['Population', 'Country Name',]].sort_values(by='Population', ascending=False).plot(kind='bar')
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

How would you explain the result?

```
